---
layout: post
title: "Fluids - 02 Viscous Fluids"
date: 2021-02-28
---

*A series of study notes reading Fluid Mechanics by L.D. Landau and E.M. Lifshitz. The two giants in the world of physics.*

In the last note we presented the conservation of mass, equilibration of forces for ideal fluid, i.e. fluid without energy dissipation occurring during the motion of the fluid. However, in real life like water and honey, fluids are viscous and thermal conduction occurs all the time. In order to obtain the equations describing the motion of a viscous fluid, we need additional terms. Conservation of mass always hold no matter what. Equilibration of forces on the other hand, requires modification.

Recall that the equilibration of forces can be written as

$$
\frac{\partial}{\partial t}(\rho v_i) = -\frac{\partial \Pi_{ik}}{\partial x_k}
$$

where $$\Pi_{ik}$$ is the momentum flux density tensor. It represents a completely reversible transfer of momentum, due simply to the mechanical transport of the different particles of liquid from place to place and to the pressure forces acting in the fluid. The viscosity (internal friction) is due to another, irreversible, transfer of momentum. To take viscosity into account, we add a irreversible "viscous" transfer of momentum $$-\sigma'$$ to $$\Pi$$

$$
\Pi_{ik} = p\delta_{ik} + \rho v_i v_k - \sigma'_{ik} = -\sigma_{ik} + \rho v_i v_i.
$$

The tensor

$$
\sigma_{ik} = -p\delta_{ik} + \sigma'_{ik}
$$

is called the *stress tensor*, and $$\sigma'_{ik}$$ is called the *viscosity stress tensor*. $$\sigma_{ik}$$ represents the part of momentum flux that is not directly due to the flow (mass transfer).

Internal friction only occurs when different fluid particles move with different velocities. If the velocity gradients are small, we may as well say that energy dissipation is due to first derivatives of the velocity and higher derivatives can be ignored. Further more, we suppose $$\sigma'_{ik}$$ is a linear function of $$\partial v_i/\partial x_k$$. We then have two observations:
- $$\sigma'_{ik}=0$$ if $$\mathbf{v}=$$constant, so $$\sigma'_{ik}$$ has no scalar term.
- In a uniform rotation with angular velocity $$\mathbf{\Omega}$$, there is no internal friction so $$\sigma'_{ik}=0$$. 

The sums

$$
\frac{\partial v_i}{\partial x_k} + \frac{\partial v_k}{\partial x_i}
$$

are linear combinations of the derivatives and vanishes when $$\mathbf{v} = \mathbf{\Omega}\times\mathbf{r}$$. Hence the most general tensor of rank two satisfying the above conditions is

$$
\sigma'_{ik} = a\left(\frac{\partial v_i}{\partial x_k} +\frac{\partial v_k}{\partial x_i} \right) + b\frac{\partial v_l}{\partial x_l}\delta_{ik},
$$

where $$a$$ and $$b$$ are independent of the velocity. However, people generally write it in another form,

$$
\sigma'_{ik} = \eta\left(\frac{\partial v_i}{\partial x_k} +\frac{\partial v_k}{\partial x_i} - \frac{2}{3}\delta_{ik}\frac{\partial v_l}{\partial x_l} \right) + \zeta\delta_{ik}\frac{\partial v_l}{\partial x_l}.
$$

The expression in parentheses vanishes on contraction with respect to $$i$$ and $$k$$. The constants $$\eta$$ and $$\zeta$$ are called *coefficients of viscosity*. Adding $$\sigma'_{ik}$$ to equilibration of forces we have

$$
\rho\frac{D}{Dt}v_i = -\frac{\partial p}{\partial x_i} + \frac{\partial}{\partial x_k}\left\{\eta\left(\frac{\partial v_i}{\partial x_k} +\frac{\partial v_k}{\partial x_i} - \frac{2}{3}\delta_{ik}\frac{\partial v_l}{\partial x_l} \right) \right\} + \frac{\partial}{\partial x_i}\left(\zeta\frac{\partial v_l}{\partial x_l} \right).
$$

This is the most general form of the equations of motion of viscous fluid with linear viscosity response. $$\eta$$ and $$\zeta$$ are generally functions of pressure and temperature. 

If we assume $$\eta$$ and $$\zeta$$ are constants, we then have

$$
\rho\frac{D}{Dt}\mathbf{v} = -\nabla p + \eta \Delta\mathbf{v} + (\zeta+\frac{1}{3}\eta)\nabla(\nabla\cdot\mathbf{v}).
$$

If we further assume the fluid is imcompressible, i.e. $$\nabla\cdot\mathbf{v} = 0$$, we have

$$
\frac{D}{Dt}\mathbf{v} = -\frac{1}{\rho}\nabla p + \frac{\eta}{\rho}\Delta\mathbf{v}.
$$

This is the famous the *Navier-Stokes equation*.