---
layout: post
title: "Fluids - 01 Ideal Fluids"
date: 2021-02-27
---

*A series of study notes reading Fluid Mechanics by L.D. Landau and E.M. Lifshitz. The two giants in the world of physics.*

The state of fluid is usually described by it velocity field $$\mathbf{v}=\mathbf{v}(x,y,z,t)$$ and any two thermodynamic quantities, for instance the pressure field $$p(x,y,z,t)$$ and the density field $$\rho(x,y,z,t)$$. Note that all thermodynamic quantities are determinded by the values of any two of them. So if we are given five quantities, namely the three components of the velocity $$\mathbf{v}$$, the pressure $$p$$ and the density $$\rho$$, the state of the moving fluid is completely determined.

## Material Derivative
We now move on to define the material derivative. Usually the *time derivative* $$\frac{dF}{dt}$$ gives the rate of the target quantity $$F$$ changes with time in a fixed frame. However in fluid mechanics we are often interested in the change rate of $$F$$ that follows the flow. For example, if we are flushing several effervescent tablets down a drain and we are interested in the volume of one particular tablet $$F(x,y,z,t)$$. The position of the tablet is also a function of time. So by chain rule

$$
\begin{align}
    \frac{DF}{Dt} &= \frac{d}{dt}U(x(t),y(t),z(t),t) \\
    &= \frac{\partial F}{\partial t} + \frac{\partial F}{\partial x}\frac{dx}{dt} + \frac{\partial F}{\partial y}\frac{dy}{dt} + \frac{\partial F}{\partial z}\frac{dz}{dt} \\
    &= \left(\frac{\partial}{\partial t}+\mathbf{v}\cdot\nabla\right)F,
\end{align}
$$

and so symbolically the material derivative operator is

$$
\begin{equation}
\frac{D}{Dt} \equiv \left(\frac{\partial}{\partial t}+\mathbf{v}\cdot\nabla\right).
\end{equation}
$$

## Conservation of Mass
The movement of fluid is governed by serveral conservation laws. The first is the *conservation of mass*. The mass of some fluid inside a given volume $$V_0$$ is simply

$$
\int_{V_0}\rho dV.
$$

Denote a small area on the surface of $$V_0$$ by $$ds$$ and $$\mathbf{n}$$ is the direction normal to the surface pointing outward. Then rate of the mass of fluid flowing out of $$V_0$$ through that small area is given by $$\rho \mathbf{v}\cdot\mathbf{n}ds$$, and so the total mass of fluid flowing out of $$V_0$$ through its surface $$S_0$$ is given by

$$
\oint_{S_0}\rho\mathbf{v}\cdot\mathbf{n}.
$$

In whole we can also denote the loss of mass for $$V_0$$ as

$$
-\frac{d}{dt}\int_{V_0}\rho dV.
$$

Equating the two expressions and use Green's formula to give

$$
\int_{V_0}\frac{\partial\rho}{\partial t} + \nabla\cdot(\rho\mathbf{V})dV = 0,
$$

the time derivative is taken into the integral since the position of the volume does not change. Since this should hold for any volume, the integrand must vanish and we arrive at the final expression

$$
\frac{\partial\rho}{\partial t} + \nabla\cdot(\rho\mathbf{v}) = 0.
$$

This is sometimes also called the *equation of continuity of mass*.

## Equilibration of Forces
Consider some volume $$V_0$$ in the fluid with surface $$S_0$$. The total external force acting on this volume is given by

$$
-\oint_{S_0} p \mathbf{n}ds + \int_{V_0}\mathbf{g}dV,
$$

where $$p$$ is the pressure and $$\mathbf{g}$$ is some external force field. Newton's second law states that $$F=ma$$, i.e. external forces will induce acceleration and the external forces equal to mass times acceleration. The acceleration is just the material derivative of $$\mathbf{v}$$ (since matter drifts with flow) and so

$$
\int_{V_0}\rho \frac{D}{Dt}\mathbf{v} dV = -\oint_{S_0} p \mathbf{n}ds + \int_{V_0}\mathbf{g}dV.
$$

We can transform it all into volume integral

$$
\int_{V_0}\rho \frac{D}{Dt}\mathbf{v} dV = -\int_{V_0} \nabla p dV + \int_{V_0}\mathbf{g}dV,
$$

and since this holds for all $$V_0$$ we finally arrive at

$$
\frac{D}{Dt}\mathbf{v} = -\frac{1}{\rho}\nabla p + \mathbf{g}.
$$

This was first obtained by L. Euler in $$1755$$ and is sometimes also called the *Euler's equation*. Note that this derivation have taken no account of processes of energy dissipation, which may occur due to viscosity and heat exchange between different parts of the fluid and is vital in micro fluids. We may ignore energy dissipation when the liquid is *ideal*, that is thermal conductivity and viscosity is unimportant.

### Adiabatic motion

The absence of heat exchange between different parts of the fluid means that the motion is *adiabatic* throughout the fluid. Denoting by $$s$$ the entropy per unit mass we say

$$\frac{Ds}{Dt}=0$$

which means the fluid is adiabatic. If we further assume $$s$$ is a constant, the motion is said to be *isentropic*. For any flow we have the thermodynamic relation

$$
dw = Tds + Vdp,
$$

where $$w$$ is the heat function per unit mass of fluid (enthalpy), $$V=1/\rho$$ is the volume and $$T$$ is the temperature. If the flow is *isentropic*, we simply have

$$dw = Vdp = dp/\rho$$

and so the equilibration of force can be written as

$$
\frac{D\mathbf{v}}{Dt} = -\nabla w + \mathbf{g}.
$$

Since

$$
\frac{1}{2}\nabla (\mathbf{v}\cdot\mathbf{v}) = \mathbf{v}\times(\nabla\times\mathbf{v}) + (\mathbf{v}\cdot\nabla)\mathbf{v}
$$

we have

$$
\frac{\partial\mathbf{v}}{\partial t}+\frac{1}{2}\nabla (\mathbf{v}\cdot\mathbf{v}) - \mathbf{v}\times(\nabla\times\mathbf{v}) = -\nabla w + \mathbf{g}.
$$

## Energy Flux

Suppose we are given a fixed volume element in space, then the energy of unit volum of fluid is

$$
\frac{1}{2}\rho v^2 + \rho\epsilon,
$$

here we simply write $$\mathbf{v}\cdot\mathbf{v}=v^2$$ and $$\epsilon$$ is the internal energy per unit mass. Then the change of energy is given by

$$
\begin{equation}
\frac{\partial}{\partial t}(\frac{1}{2}\rho v^2 + \rho\epsilon) = \frac{1}{2}v^2\frac{\partial\rho}{\partial t}+\rho\mathbf{v}\cdot\frac{\partial \mathbf{v}}{\partial t} + \frac{\partial}{\partial t}(\rho\epsilon).
\end{equation}
$$

Suppose there is no external force field, by conservation of mass and equilibration of forces we have

$$
\frac{\partial}{\partial t}(\frac{1}{2}\rho v^2 + \rho\epsilon) = -\frac{1}{2}v^2\nabla\cdot(\rho\mathbf{v})-\mathbf{v}\cdot\nabla p - \rho\mathbf{v}\cdot(\mathbf{v}\cdot\nabla)\mathbf{v} + \frac{\partial}{\partial t}(\rho\epsilon).
$$

We can further simplify it by

$$
\begin{align}
\frac{\partial}{\partial t}(\frac{1}{2}\rho v^2 + \rho\epsilon) &= -\frac{1}{2}v^2\nabla\cdot(\rho\mathbf{v}) - \rho\mathbf{v}\cdot\nabla(\frac{1}{2}v^2+w) + \rho T\mathbf{v}\cdot\nabla s + \frac{\partial}{\partial t}(\rho\epsilon)\\
&= -\frac{1}{2}v^2\nabla\cdot(\rho\mathbf{v}) - \rho\mathbf{v}\cdot\nabla(\frac{1}{2}v^2+w) + \rho T\mathbf{v}\cdot\nabla s + \epsilon\frac{\partial\rho}{\partial t} + \rho\frac{\partial\epsilon}{\partial t} \\
&= -\frac{1}{2}v^2\nabla\cdot(\rho\mathbf{v}) - \rho\mathbf{v}\cdot\nabla(\frac{1}{2}v^2+w) + \rho T\mathbf{v}\cdot\nabla s + (\epsilon+\frac{p}{\rho})\frac{\partial\rho}{\partial t} + \rho T\frac{\partial s}{\partial t}\\
&= -\frac{1}{2}v^2\nabla\cdot(\rho\mathbf{v}) - \rho\mathbf{v}\cdot\nabla(\frac{1}{2}v^2+w) + \rho T\mathbf{v}\cdot\nabla s + w\frac{\partial \rho}{\partial t} + \rho T\frac{\partial s}{\partial t} \\
&= -\frac{1}{2}v^2\nabla\cdot(\rho\mathbf{v}) - \rho\mathbf{v}\cdot\nabla(\frac{1}{2}v^2+w) + \rho T\mathbf{v}\cdot\nabla s -w\nabla\cdot(\rho\mathbf{v}) - \rho T\mathbf{v}\cdot\nabla s \\
&= -\nabla\cdot(\rho\mathbf{v}(\frac{1}{2}v^2+w))
\end{align}

$$

The first step uses the fact that $$\mathbf{v}\cdot(\mathbf{v}\cdot\nabla)\mathbf{v}=(1/2)\mathbf{v}\cdot\nabla v^2$$ and thermodynamic relation $$dw=Tds+(1/\rho)dp$$ that we have used before. The third step uses the thermodynamic relation $$d\epsilon = Tds - pdV = Tds + (p/\rho^2)d\rho$$. The fourth step uses the fact that $$w=\epsilon+p/\rho$$. The fifth step uses the conservation of mass and conservation of entropy.

If we integrate it over some volume $$V_0$$ and apply Green's formule

$$
\begin{align}
\frac{\partial}{\partial t}\int_{V_0}(\frac{1}{2}\rho v^2+\rho\epsilon)dV &= -\int_{v_0}\nabla\cdot[\rho\mathbf{v}(\frac{1}{2}v^2+w)]dV \\
&=-\oint_{S_0}\rho\mathbf{v}(\frac{1}{2}v^2+w)\cdot\mathbf{n}ds,
\end{align}
$$

on the left hand side is the change rate of energy in a fixed volume. Then by conservation of energy on the right hand should be the amount of energy flowing out of this volume in unit time. Therefore we call

$$
\rho\mathbf{v}(\frac{1}{2}v^2+w)
$$

the *energy flux density* vector.

## Momentum Flux

The momentum per unit volume if $$\rho\mathbf{v}$$ and its rates of change is

$$
\frac{\partial}{\partial t}(\rho v_i) = \rho\frac{\partial v_i}{\partial t}+\frac{\partial \rho}{\partial t}v_i.
$$

By mass conservation we have

$$
\frac{\partial \rho}{\partial t} = -\frac{\partial (\rho v_k)}{\partial x_k}.
$$

Together with equilibration of forces we have

$$
\begin{align}
\frac{\partial}{\partial t}(\rho v_i) &= -\rho v_k\frac{\partial v_i}{\partial x_k} - \frac{\partial p}{\partial x_i} - v_i\frac{\partial(\rho v_k)}{\partial x_k} \\
&= -\frac{\partial p}{\partial x_i} - \frac{\partial}{\partial x_k}(\rho v_i v_x) \\
&= -\frac{\partial}{\partial x_k} \Pi_{ik},
\end{align}
$$

where

$$
\Pi_{ik} = p\delta_{ik} + \rho v_i v_k
$$

is the *momentum flux density tensor*. We can see the meaning better by integrating the equation over some volume

$$
\frac{\partial}{\partial t}\int_{V_0}\rho v_i dV = -\int_{V_0}\frac{\partial \Pi_{ik}}{\partial x_k}dV = -\oint_{S_0}\Pi_{ik}ds_k.
$$

Here $$ds_k$$ is $$n_k ds$$, $$ds$$ is surface element and $$\mathbf{n}$$ is unit vector normal to the surface pointing outwards. We may notice that

$$
\Pi \mathbf{n} = p\mathbf{n} + \rho\mathbf{v}(\mathbf{v}\cdot\mathbf{n}).
$$